Configure Xdebug debugging sessions to be started by a trigger by default, fixes #3593, fixes #3731 (#3754)
drud/ddev: docs/users/step-debugging.md

## Step-debugging with ddev and xdebug

Every ddev project is automatically configured with xdebug so that popular IDEs can do step-debugging of PHP code
without any server side configuration. Check the [configuration](#Configuration) section for details how you can
change the xdebug configuration for your ddev project.

### Enable debugging in your IDE

#### PHPStorm

1. Toggle the Start Listen PHP Debug Connections button start listening php debug connections on the PhpStorm toolbar.
   ![Start listening to debugging connections](images/ps_quick_start_zero_debug_stop_listening_debug_connections_toolbar.png)
2. Set a breakpoint

> 3. When you start debugging a [website](#Debug a website) or [CLI application](#Debug a CLI application) PhpStorm might

Reviewer: These links don't show up right in markdown. 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112444/174677996-5b79ab1e-af1a-4024-bf2e-8a6039157fdf.png)

See https://github.com/drud/ddev/blob/d2ed0c21c89e1f8f9aabdb4c1bee98993d1c522e/docs/users/step-debugging.md

   ask you for a path mapping. The default will work for single files, but to debug complex application you have to got
   to `File | Settings | PHP | Servers` and map your project directory to `/var/www/html`.
   ![PhpStorm mapping](images/PHPStormServerMapping.png)

Note that if you are using PhpStorm inside WSL2 (or perhaps other Linux configurations),
under `Help | Edit Custom VM Options`, add a line: `-Djava.net.preferIPv4Stack=true` This makes PhpStorm listen for
Xdebug using IPV4; the Linux version of PhpStorm seems to default to using only IPv6.

For additional information
see [PHPStorm zero-configuration debugging](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/phpstorm/zero-configuration-debugging.html).

#### Visual Studio Code (vscode)

> 1. Install the [php-debug](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=felixfbecker.php-debug) extension.

Author: I'm not the author of the vscode part. So no, it is not tested by me. I just reordered the existing documentation and updated it accodingly to the new xdebug behavior.

2. Update the project's [launch.json] (in `.vscode/launch.json`)  to add "Listen for xdebug" (
   see [config snippet](snippets/launch.json)). For more on launch.json,
   see [vscode docs](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging#_launch-configurations).
3. Set a breakpoint in your index.php. If it isn't solid red, restart.
4. In the menu, choose Run->Start Debugging.You may have to select "Listen for XDebug" by the green arrowhead at the top
   left. The bottom pane of vscode should now be orange (live) and should say "Listen for XDebug".

Note that if you are using vscode on Windows with WSL2, you'll want the "PHP Debug" extension enabled in your distro (
for example, Ubuntu). You'll also need the "Remote - WSL" extension enabled. vscode will suggest both of these to you if
you have WSL2 enabled and a PHP project.

### Debug a website

> To start and stop Xdebug from the browser, you need to set a cookie parameter. You can use one of the

Author: You can start debugging sessions without any configuration now. If you like xdebug sessions to start automatically you have to run `ddev xdebug autostart`.

> To start and stop Xdebug from the browser, you need to set a cookie parameter. You can use one of the

Reviewer: That's not my experience. You have to `ddev debug autostart` to do it with no configuration.

Or maybe it's because all existing projects have `xdebug_enabled: false` in them?

> To start and stop Xdebug from the browser, you need to set a cookie parameter. You can use one of the

Author: > Or maybe it's because all existing projects have xdebug_enabled: false in them?

Yes that's proabably the reason. I noted this in the manual testing instructions.
Of course we should not change the behavior for projects that already have `xdebug_enabled: false` set explicitly. Maybe this was done by intend.
For new project `xdebug_enabled` should not appear in the config.yaml at all when running `ddev config` and the default will be `on`. As you already noticed the "new on" won't have any negative effect.

> To start and stop Xdebug from the browser, you need to set a cookie parameter. You can use one of the

Reviewer: All projects in the world have `xdebug_enabled: false`, because it's been the default since the beginning (before `ddev xdebug` even existed, when you had to change this setting to debug).  So we have to figure our way around this bit of friction.

> [available browser debugging extensions](#Available browser debugging extensions). Alternatively you can debug every

Reviewer: This links don't show in markdown correctly, see https://github.com/drud/ddev/blob/d2ed0c21c89e1f8f9aabdb4c1bee98993d1c522e/docs/users/step-debugging.md

request by executing `ddev xdebug autostart`.

Activate the debugging extension in your browser:

![Xdebug helper in Chrome](images/ps_xdebug_helper_chrome.png)

#### Available browser debugging extensions

> | Chrome                                                                                        | Firefox                                                                                                                                                                        | Internet Explorer                                                               | Microsoft Edge                                                                                                    | Safari                                                                             | Opera                                                                           |

Reviewer: At this point IE is just fluff I think. You're the Windows expert so I defer to you, but consider removing.

Author: Support was dropped on june 15th 2022. Just a few days ago - finally. I agree, will remove it.

| [Xdebug Helper](https://chrome.google.com/extensions/detail/eadndfjplgieldjbigjakmdgkmoaaaoc) | [Xdebug Helper](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/xdebug-helper-for-firefox/) or [Xdebug-ext](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/xdebug-ext-quantum/) | [PhpStorm bookmarklets generator](https://www.jetbrains.com/phpstorm/marklets/) | [Xdebug Helper](https://microsoftedge.microsoft.com/addons/detail/xdebug-helper/ggnngifabofaddiejjeagbaebkejomen) | [`XDebugToggle`](https://apps.apple.com/app/safari-xdebug-toggle/id1437227804?mt=12) | [PhpStorm bookmarklets generator](https://www.jetbrains.com/phpstorm/marklets/) |

### Debug a command line application

> To start a step debug session for a PHP script on the command line prefix your command line

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start a step debug session for a PHP script on the command line, prefix your command line
```

> with `php -dxdebug.start_with_request=yes {path_to_your_script}` when executing the script inside the ddev container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with `php -dxdebug.start_with_request=yes {path_to_your_script}` when executing the script inside the ddev container or with `ddev exec`.
```

Alternatively you can run `ddev xdebug autostart` and just execute the script as usual.

Your IDE may offer you additional ways to debug for example unit tests.

Please note: When using PHPStorm you should first [debug a website](#Debug a website) and configure a path mapping.

### Configuration

**Key facts:**

> * You can let xdebug start a debugging session for every request with `ddev xdebug autostart` and

Author: `ddev xdebug autostart` will also start debugging sessions on cli, not only web requests... one of the reasons for the change of the behavior as this caused trouble.

> * You can let xdebug start a debugging session for every request with `ddev xdebug autostart` and

Reviewer: I'll have to go back and test, but I think the problem here is that you changed the default value for xdebug_enabled, but of course there are thousands of projects that have it set to false. So this will currently work (without intervention) only on new projects.

> * You can let xdebug start a debugging session for every request with `ddev xdebug autostart` and

Author: As `ddev xdebug autostart` will also run `ddev xdebug on` this shouldn't affect this specific use case here. I will accept your suggestions adding "web" but maybe we should add another line that `xdebug autostart` will not only affect web requests but also cli scripts.

  return to the default with `ddev xdebug trigger`

> * You can disable xdebug with `ddev xdebug off` or setting `xdebug_enabled: false` in your `.ddev/config.yml`

Reviewer: Consider removing xdebug_enabled from app/yaml

* `ddev xdebug status` will show you the current xdebug configuration

> * If xdebug is disabled in your configuration, you can enable it for a already-running project with `ddev xdebug on`

Author: `ddev xdebug autostart` and `ddev xdebug trigger` is explained in the first line. And no, I would not suggest using using xdebug autostart, as it will cause problems if your website executes AJAX Requests, or contains images served by php or CLI scripts run in parallel while you are debugging.
`ddev xdebug autostart` is just a "compatbility" mode for the current `xdebug on` behavior and might be useful for people who do not use an IDE for development.

> * If xdebug is disabled in your configuration, you can enable it for a already running container with `ddev xdebug on`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If xdebug is disabled in your configuration, you can enable it for a already-running project with `ddev xdebug on`
```

For more background on XDebug see the [XDebug documentation](https://xdebug.org/docs/remote).
The intention here is that one won't have to understand XDebug to do debugging.

#### Using Xdebug on a port other than the default

By default, ddev is set up to contact the default port, port 9003 on your IDE. However, if you have something else
listening on that port or your IDE does not yet default to 9003, you'll need to change the port. (PhpStorm and vscode

> have switch to supporting 9003 instead of 9000 for some time now.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have switched to supporting 9003 instead of 9000 for some time now.)
```

* Then change your IDE's configuration to listen on the new port.

NOTE: If you are using a PHP version below PHP7.2, you will be using Xdebug version 2.x, instead of 3.x. In that case
the port config should be `xdebug.remote_port` instead.

### Troubleshooting Xdebug

xdebug is a server-side tool: It is installed automatically on the container and you do *not* need to install or
configure it on your workstation.

The basic thing to understand about xdebug is that it's a network protocol. Your IDE (like PhpStorm) will listen on the

> xdebug port (9003 by default in v1.19+, previously 9000). Then if a xdebug session is started, php inside the container

Reviewer: ```suggestion
xdebug port (9003 by default in v1.19+, previously 9000). When an xdebug session is started, php inside the container
```

will try to open a TCP connection to the IDE. When starting the session via a browser xdebug will try to connect back to

> client, otherwise `host.docker.internal:9003` will be used to connect, which is provided by docker. So you have to make

Reviewer: ```suggestion
client, otherwise `host.docker.internal:9003` will be used to connect, which is provided by DDEV or Docker Desktop. So you have to make
```

Author: host.docker.internal is not set when using docker on linux?

Reviewer: It's set by ddev by exploring the network topology on Linux or Colima. Only Docker Desktop sets it otherwise. Ddev generates docker-compose stanza to define it, and figures out what it should be. Not perfect either.
